GWEN IFILL: The Pentagon
mistakenly ships live anthrax to
dozens of labs.
Good evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Also ahead this Wednesday:
despair and anger in China, as
divers race to rescue any
survivors
trapped in the hull of a
capsized ship sinking deeper.
GWEN IFILL: Then, we take a
broader look at Asia's rising
superpower with former Treasury
Secretaries Henry Paulson and
Robert Rubin, who say we should
be strengthening ties with
China.
ROBERT RUBIN, Former U.S.
Treasury Secretary: I think we
would benefit greatly from
Chinese
investment in this country, and
I think we should be proactively
seeking it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, sticker
price shock: why the cost of
health care could skyrocket
for some Americans come 2016.
GWEN IFILL: Those are some of
the stories we're covering on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Authorities in
China called in scores more
divers today, hoping to reach
and rescue more than 400 people
still missing on a capsized
cruise ship.
Tornado-force winds
literally blew the vessel
over late Monday, as it sailed
up the Yangtze River from
Nanjing. Only 14 people have
been found alive, and families
are demanding answers.
Lucy Watson of Independent
Television News filed this
report from the scene.
LUCY WATSON: The wait to be
told anything is agonizing. All
Li Ling (ph) and her family
want is to be taken to the river
to see where their parents could
be. But they're being
stopped.
MAN (through translator): I
haven't been able to close my
eyes or sleep since it sank.
We have been told nothing.
Anything we do know has come
from the Internet.
WOMAN (through translator): I
just want to go to the water to
see it for myself.
LUCY WATSON: But if she could
get there, this is what she
would see, the reality of
recovered bodies atop a mighty
vessel now barely visible.
Apart from a few moments of
triumph and rescue yesterday,
this operation has been hampered
by a strong current, murky
waters and bad weather after
this country's worst maritime
disaster in recent memory.
Cranes are poised to salvage a
wreck, and this search area has
been extended. Rescuers
stand waiting, still hoping.
But the military and the
medics are ever ready onshore.
LIU JIN, Director General, China
Information Ministry: We will
not give up the hope to
find survivors until the last
minute. When the five ships
gather together, the experts
-- also, the experts will make
our decisions with an evaluation
how to be going on.
LUCY WATSON: The government is
promising an investigation,
because the safety of this
state-owned boat is being
questioned. For now, any anger
is being contained, and nobody
is yet apportioning blame.
Grief is overriding everything.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news, more than 700 migrants
made it to shore in Myanmar
in an overloaded fishing boat.
The country's navy towed the
vessel in, after holding it
at sea for days. Many on board
were Muslim Rohingya and some
were Bangladeshi. Police
separated the two groups and
sent the Bangladeshis away in
buses. The Rohingya were put
inside
a warehouse. Myanmar is largely
Buddhist and doesn't recognize
the Rohingya as citizens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The corruption
scandal that's engulfed soccer
rolled on today, with reports
the FBI is investigating how
World Cups were awarded. They
came a day after Sepp Blatter,
head of soccer's governing body,
FIFA, announced he's resigning.
The Russian sports minister
insisted today that plans to
play the 2018 World Cup in his
country will go forward.
VITALY MUTKO, Russian Sports
Minister (through translator):
Blatter is the president of
FIFA and he has always
maintained warm relations with
Russia. But, in general, the
decision
on hosting the World Cup was
made by the executive committee
of FIFA, and it is a legal
decision.
No resignations can
affect or change it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The government
of Qatar likewise rejected any
talk that it might be stripped
of the 2022 World Cup. The
foreign minister said his
country is the victim of --
quote
-- "prejudice and racism"
against Arab Islamic States.
GWEN IFILL: A suspect in a
Boston terror investigation
talked of killing police before
he was shot dead by officers.
That's according to federal
court documents filed today.
Usaama
Rahim had been under long-term
surveillance when he was shot
and killed early Tuesday.
The police commissioner says
he lunged with a large knife.
WILLIAM EVANS, Boston Police
Commissioner: Our officers went
out there to only question
the individual, because the
level of our concern rose to the
level that we needed to question
him. I think we never
anticipated what his reaction
would be, and that he would pull
out obviously a military knife
and approach the officers.
GWEN IFILL: Video of the
shooting was shown to community
leaders today. They say it
confirmed Rahim was shot in the
front, not the back. But they
say it's not clear if
police needed to use deadly
force. Meanwhile, an alleged
accomplice, David Wright, was
arrested
last night on a charge of
conspiracy to obstruct justice.
He appeared in federal court
today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former Rhode
Island Governor Lincoln Chafee
has formally entered the race
for the Democratic presidential
nomination in 2016. As a U.S.
senator, Chafee was the
only Republican to vote against
the Iraq War. Later, he turned
independent and then he
became a Democrat.
He made his formal announcement
today in Arlington, Virginia.
LINCOLN CHAFEE (D), Presidential
Candidate: If we as leaders
show good judgment and
make good decisions, we can fix
much of what is ailing us. We
must deliberately and carefully
extricate ourselves from
expensive wars. Just think of
how better this money could be
spent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Chafee is the
fourth Democratic candidate in a
field dominated, so far, by
front-runner Hillary Clinton.
GWEN IFILL: In economic news,
the U.S. trade deficit fell
sharply in April, by 19 percent.
The March deficit had been the
worst since 2008, after a labor
dispute ended at West
Coast ports and a backlog of
Chinese goods flooded in.
And on Wall Street today, the
Dow Jones industrial average
gained 64 points to close near
18080.
The Nasdaq rose more than 20
points. The S&P 500 added four.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a spike in the number of labs
that mistakenly received
live anthrax; out-of-pocket
costs for health care on the
rise; what did the Red Cross buy
with half-a-billion dollars
originally raised to rebuild
homes in Haiti?; what a mighty
China means for the U.S. and
global stability; and debating
development along the Grand
Canyon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Pentagon
today gave new information about
that scare over live anthrax
samples. Officials said 51 labs
in 17 states, plus Washington,
D.C., and three foreign
countries
received the suspected live
spores. That's a larger number
than what was previously
disclosed.
At a news conference today,
Deputy Defense Secretary Robert
Work sought to reassure the
public.
ROBERT WORK, U.S. Deputy Defense
Secretary: We continue to work
with the CDC to ensure
that all possible safeguards are
taken to prevent exposure at the
labs in question and
that any worker that might have
had risk of exposure, even to
these low-concentrated samples,
they are closely monitored.
We know of no risk to the
general public from these
samples. To provide context,
the concentration
of these samples are too low to
infect the average healthy
individual. Everyone in
the Department of Defense takes
this issue very seriously,
because it is a matter of
public health and also the
health of all of the members of
our department.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Joining me now
to tell us more about what
happened and the response
is Nancy Youssef. She's the
senior national security
correspondent for The Daily
Beast.
Nancy, welcome back
to the program.
So, many more samples of anthrax
were sent out to these labs than
was known before. Why
is this coming out in bits
and pieces like this?
NANCY YOUSSEF, The Daily Beast:
Well, part of it is that it
takes several days to determine
which samples were sent out that
were positive and which were
negative.
This is out of 400 lots, and
from each lot comes several
scores of samples that are sent
to various labs, and so they're
going through lot by lot and
doing testing. The number
that we're giving is only out of
four lots, 1 percent. And in
100 percent of the cases
that have tested so far, it has
come back positive for anthrax.
And so it portends of a lot more
laboratories and states coming
up as recipients of live
anthrax.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So there could
be more coming out, is what
you're saying?
NANCY YOUSSEF: Yes, that's
right. The briefing that you
showed today, they said
it repeatedly to
anticipate more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, tell us,
what is it -- they said today
that so far no one has
been infected. Are they certain
of that and what are they saying
about the danger
to the public?
NANCY YOUSSEF: Well, they're
saying no one has been infected,
but they're also giving
antibiotics to 31 personnel,
nine of them here, 22 overseas,
as a precautionary measure.
And so there is some concern on
that point. But to the public,
it doesn't appear that
there was any danger because
these are samples that are sent
to laboratories, laboratories
often that -- whose technicians
are vaccinated, whose facilities
are well protected for such
measures.
And so the danger is not so much
to the public in terms of
getting anthrax through those
shipments, but the idea of live
anthrax being sent out to an
untold number of laboratories,
states and workers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So why is it
being shipped out to so many
places?
NANCY YOUSSEF: So, what
happened after the anthrax
letter scare of 2001, in which
powdered
anthrax was sent to Senator
Daschle and a number of news
agencies, is there was a real
uptick in funding for research
on anthrax and detection
methods, because there was a
fear that this was going to be
an external threat, a form of
bioterrorism.
As it turns out, it was an
internal threat. And so the DOD
keeps these spores, if you
will, provides them to these
laboratories for the purpose of
doing detection research,
other kinds of research to
ensure that places can prevent
anthrax from being brought in.
For example, the Pentagon Force
Protection Agency was one of the
ones to receive live
anthrax, and they use that to
detect -- to make sure that
those coming to the Pentagon
are not bringing in
live anthrax with them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just
quickly, finally, Nancy, are
they any closer to understanding
why this happened,
what was the lapse?
NANCY YOUSSEF: No.
And, in fact, today's press
conference suggested that we're
further away from answers. They
said that they had methods in
place to make sure that live
anthrax didn't go out. And
yet, because there is no
standard practice, that
everybody sort of has their own
way of
determining what's accepted, and
the fact that 100 percent of the
cases they have tested
so far showed up positive, it
suggests that at the minimum
there was a fundamental flaw
in their prevention methods.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nancy Youssef
with The Daily Beast, thank you
for following this for us.
NANCY YOUSSEF: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: If it feels like
you are spending more for health
care through higher deductibles
or premiums, you may be right.
Under the Affordable Care Act,
insurers are required
to post rate increases if they
exceed 10 percent, and, in many
cases, the price spikes for the
coming year range from 20
percent to 85 percent.
And another study shows people
who are covered by their
employers are also paying more
through
higher out-of-pocket costs that
leave as many as 31 million
people underinsured.
Larry Levitt studies this for
the Kaiser Family Foundation.
and Dr. David Blumenthal is
the president of the
Commonwealth Fund, which
released a second survey on
out-of-pocket
costs.
Larry Levitt, could you explain
to me why these price hikes are
going up all of a sudden?
Or is it not all of a sudden?
LARRY LEVITT, Senior Vice
President, Kaiser Family
Foundation: Well, first, I
would
say that it's hard to generalize
from what we have seen so far.
I mean, as you said, insurers
are only required to report
right now increases of 10
percent
or more. So, not surprisingly,
those are all in double digits.
But that said, reading
the tea leaves, it does look
like premiums are heading
upwards.
And it's for a combination of
factors. I mean, first of all,
health care costs, which
have been growing very slowly
recently, are increasing faster,
particularly for prescription
drugs. And insurers are for the
first time under Obamacare
setting premiums based on
actual experience
with enrollees.
Up until now, they were guessing
at how much health care people
were using. Now they
have actually some experience
under their belts and in many
cases people are -- look
to be sicker than
insurers expected.
GWEN IFILL: Well, are sicker
people now drawn more to this
because of Obamacare? Is
that part of the connection?
LARRY LEVITT: Yes, one of the
things that the Affordable Care
Act did was eliminated
discrimination against people
with preexisting conditions.
So, for the first time, someone
who was sick and wanted
insurance can get it. So, the
first people in the door tended
to be those people who knew they
needed insurance and
they had pretty high health care
needs. The key now is to try
and get more healthy people
in the door. And the big wild
card is, will more people enroll
and will those be healthier
than the enrollees we have now?
GWEN IFILL: Now, as you pointed
out, these numbers are only for
increases over 10 percent.
What about state regulators?
Do they have a say in whether
these numbers can go up or
not?
LARRY LEVITT: They do. In most
states, the insurance
commissioner has the power to
disapprove these increase if he
or she feels they're
unjustified.
So, the actuaries and insurance
departments are sharpening their
pencils and reviewing
these rates. And if history is
a judge, many of them will come
down, at least somewhat,
and in some cases by a lot.
GWEN IFILL: And which states
are right now the most affected
by this? And is it because
of medical costs or because of
the region or because of whether
people have been insured
at all before?
LARRY LEVITT: Well, medical
costs, you know, affect all
states. I don't think that's
a big factor in the
variation across states.
Probably, one of the biggest
factors is how enrollment is
doing. Enrollment has varied
tremendously across the country.
Florida signed up a lot of
people, a very high percentage
of the eligible population
there. Other states like Iowa,
for example, have signed
up very few people.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Dr. David Blumenthal, I want to
turn to you now about your
report, which says that 31
million people are underinsured
because of this increase in
deductibles. What does
underinsured mean, first of all?
DR. DAVID BLUMENTHAL, President,
Commonwealth Fund: Well, our
definition of underinsurance
is that you're underinsured if
you spend more than 10 percent
of your income, excluding
premiums, on health care, and
you're insured, or if your
deductible exceeds 5 percent of
your income.
Now, if you are poor, that is,
if you have an income of less
than 200 percent of the
federal poverty level, we define
underinsurance as spending more
than 5 percent of your income
on out-of-pocket expenditures.
GWEN IFILL: Are these
out-of-pocket expenditures,
these deductibles, are they a
tradeoff for
getting premiums lower? We were
just talking about premiums?
DR. DAVID BLUMENTHAL: They can
be. One reason why premiums can
be kept lower is by
asking people who are insured to
pay more of the cost of care.
That takes the insurance
company off the hook for that
part of the cost of care.
GWEN IFILL: Well, what happens?
Do people just seek less care?
Are they less likely
to go to the doctor?
DR. DAVID BLUMENTHAL: Yes.
About half of people who are
underinsured report that
they are having trouble paying
medical bills or getting less
medical care than they think
they need.
GWEN IFILL: So, what's the
connection then to the
Affordable Care Act here? Some
would
look at this and say, this was
one of the problems that the
Affordable Care Act was
supposed to solve.
DR. DAVID BLUMENTHAL: We have
been tracking this since 2003.
Most of the increase that we
have observed in underinsurance
occurred before the Affordable
Care Act became law,
between 2003 and 2010.
GWEN IFILL: So the trend
had kicked in already?
DR. DAVID BLUMENTHAL: The trend
had kicked in. Since 2010,
there really hasn't been
much of a change.
And another thing to keep in
mind is that for us to consider
you underinsured, you had
to have insurance for a full
year. Many of the people who
responded to our survey
had no insurance prior to 2014
or, if they had had insurance
through Obama -- through
the Affordable Care Act, they
only had it for six months. So
we don't feel that this
survey captures the effect
of the Affordable Care Act.
GWEN IFILL: OK. Well, I want
to ask you both now to answer a
very basic question,
which is, either way, no matter
what the cause of this is,
health care has grown more
expensive
for people for whatever reason.
What do consumers do? Do they
shop for a better
deal? Do they just go without?
I will start with
you, Dr. Blumenthal.
DR. DAVID BLUMENTHAL: Well, one
of the things that the
Affordable Care Act has done,
which
is advantageous to consumers, is
created these marketplaces,
where people can go online and
comparison-shop.
That was very hard to do before
the Affordable Care Act,
especially for people who had
individual
insurance policies. So, the
opportunity to see what a given
insurance company charges
for a given type of coverage is
new and available to people.
And one of the reasons why these
announced premium increases may
not be as serious as they are
regarded is that people
will have choice.
They will have a chance to move
out of a high-price insurance
into a lower-price insurance.
GWEN IFILL: Will they have a
choice on out-of-pocket costs?
DR. DAVID BLUMENTHAL:
Well, they will, yes.
They -- the way the Affordable
Care Act works is, it creates
bands of insurance with --
according
to generosity, and the level of
deductibles and co-pays is part
of the choice.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask you
Larry Levitt, what is your
prescription for what consumers
should do when faced with these
new -- this sticker shock?
LARRY LEVITT: Well, I
would agree with David.
The -- what we have seen in the
first two years of Obamacare is
that insurers are jockeying
for position in these new
marketplaces. So, while there
are some insurers that are
increasing
premiums substantially, there
are others that are actually
decreasing premiums. So there
are good deals to be had.
But consumers really have to
look around. Many consumers did
shop after the first
year of the ACA going into this
year, but many just let momentum
take hold and stuck
with their old plan, potentially
paying much more. So, shopping
around is really the
key here.
GWEN IFILL: Well, the Supreme
Court may have a lot to say
about what happens to all
of this by the end
of this month.
Larry Levitt of the Kaiser
Family Foundation, and David
Blumenthal of the Commonwealth
Fund,
thank you both very much.
DR. DAVID BLUMENTHAL:
Thank you.
LARRY LEVITT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The American Red
Cross is under scrutiny once
again for the way it operates,
and how it's using the money
that people donate to it, the
latest item, a joint
investigation
by two news organizations
pointing to what they say is a
failure to deliver on promises
of housing in Haiti after the
earthquake there five years ago.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: January 12,
2010, a catastrophic earthquake
ravaged Haiti's capital,
Port-au-Prince,
shaking whole neighborhoods to
bits, and leaving 1.5 million
people homeless.
The American Red Cross raised
nearly $500 million for Haiti's
relief, far more than
any other charity. And a year
after the quake, Red Cross CEO
Gail McGovern announced
plans to create -- quote --
"brand-new communities."
GAIL MCGOVERN, CEO, American Red
Cross: We're working on a
planned partnership to build
permanent housing for people
that were left homeless during
the earthquake. Under this
partnership, USAID would
identify and pair at least two
locations in Haiti for permanent
homes that would include roads,
drainage, and other
infrastructure. The plan is
that
the American Red Cross would
build these homes, including
water and sanitation.
JEFFREY BROWN: But an
investigation by ProPublica and
NPR has concluded the Red Cross
response
was plagued by failures.
Despite the lofty goals,
documents obtained by the two
media
organizations show that only six
permanent homes were built with
Red Cross funds.
They also found inaccurate
numbers on how many people were
helped by various Red Cross
programs. NPR and ProPublica
say many displaced Haitians were
given short-term rental
assistance
or housed in temporary shelters
like these, prone to termite
attacks and unable to withstand
tropical storms.
Haitians themselves say they are
still struggling just to
survive.
CARLINE PIERRE, Haiti (through
translator): The living
conditions are very hard for
the poor. We are sitting here,
and people don't really come to
buy products like they
used to. Things are difficult.
JEFFREY BROWN: In a statement
today, the Red Cross criticized
the report and touted
its accomplishments in Haiti,
building and operating eight
hospitals and clinics, providing
clean water and sanitation, and
moving more than 100,000 people
out of makeshift tents.
As for housing, the agency
argued that Haitian government
red tape blocked it from gaining
crucial land rights for
building. For instance, an
agreement for the new
communities project
was ultimately canceled
because of a land dispute.
Laura Sullivan of NPR is one of
the two journalists on the team
who reported this story. We
invited the American Red Cross
to join us, but officials there
declined our offer.
So, Laura, let me ask you,
first, give us some background
on how this came about and
how you reported it.
LAURA SULLIVAN, National Public
Radio: This was a partnership
that NPR did with ProPublica,
myself and Justin Elliott and
another reporter named Jesse
Eisinger, back in the fall,
where
we looked into Hurricane Sandy
and Isaac and the Red Cross'
response to those storms.
And we found that there was --
they spent too much time focused
on the public relations
effort in those storms and
failed in a lot of aspects. And
then we also looked at in
the fall some of the
questionable things that they
say about how they're spending
donors'
money.
JEFFREY BROWN: And so it was
looking at Haiti from there?
LAURA SULLIVAN: Exactly.
We ended up being able to see
hundreds of pages of internal
Red Cross records, e-mails
and memos that senior managers
wrote to one another. And we
also talked to dozens of
-- a dozen current and former
Red Cross employees about what
happened in Haiti and what
happened
to the money.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so on the
specific issue of creating more
housing, the Red Cross
cites a lack of land to build
on. They cite red tape that
made property rights impossible.
They are saying that they --
they basically changed -- they
had to change course and,
therefore, did.
LAURA SULLIVAN:
And that is true.
It is very difficult to build in
Haiti. And a lot of nonprofits
had a lot of trouble.
But, still, it is possible to
do. And at this point now, five
years after the earthquake,
other NGOs have been able to
build 9,000 homes. The Red
Cross has had half-a-billion
dollars
and five years in Haiti, and
they have built six homes.
JEFFREY BROWN: When you're
citing the reasons for this
failure, the prime one that
comes
through is what you see as a
lack of experience by the Red
Cross in how to carry this kind
of thing out.
LAURA SULLIVAN: That's
something that we heard from a
number of Red Cross officials
and through the Red Cross' own
documents, which just show that
this is not an area that
they have a lot of
familiarity with.
They have years of experience
doing immediate disaster relief.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, how does...
(CROSSTALK)
LAURA SULLIVAN: ... providing
things like blankets and water.
And they did that in
Haiti as well.
But what they do not know very
well how to do and have very
little experience doing is
rebuilding in a developing
country. And yet they outraised
other NGOs by hundreds
of millions of dollars, even
after the immediate disaster
relief was over, so that they
could
do just that.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, how does it
play out? There's a certain
amount of money that goes
to immediate emergency relief.
And I saw that a year after it
happened...
LAURA SULLIVAN: Absolutely.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... when they
were there providing all kinds
of things.
But you're saying that, after
that, they didn't have the
knowledge or resources -- well,
they
had the resources, but
not the knowledge?
LAURA SULLIVAN: They had the
resources. They didn't have the
knowledge.
And one of the senior officials
we talked to was in charge of
their Haiti program -- their
Haiti shelter program, Lee
Malany. And he said they just
never had a plan for housing.
Other people we talked to said,
this is not anything that they
knew how to do. And
they were kind of flying blind
in some ways in terms of being
able to get these housing
projects off the ground.
And the housing projects that
they -- they weren't ever able
to build any homes. They
say they provided homes for
130,000 Haitians. This is
another number that just did not
add up when we actually
dug down into it.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Red Cross
has pushed back pretty hard at
you today, saying in a
statement: "The Red Cross is
disappointed by the lack of
balance, context, and accuracy
in the most recent reporting by
ProPublica, NPR. It is
particularly disappointing to
see our work misrepresented,
considering we answered more
than 100 questions in writing
and provided an interview with
the head of our intentional
programs."
LAURA SULLIVAN: And that -- it
is true the Red Cross has done
-- has provided a lot of
disaster services in Haiti. And
they have certainly spent
millions of dollars providing
shelter and providing, you know,
water and things like that.
But, at the end of the day, they
didn't do what they promised
Haitians they were going
to do. And they didn't also do
what they promised their own
donors they would do. They
did answer a lot of our
questions. It went back and
forth for many months, and it is
good to have that information
from them. But what that
information did show for us and
what their own internal
documents show is that they were
not able to provide Haitians
the kind of assistance that
they had promised them.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask just
you finally, we can stipulate
that it is hard to work in
Haiti, right...
LAURA SULLIVAN: Absolutely.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... to get
these kinds of things.
Did you see examples where
things were working, where
housing was...
LAURA SULLIVAN: Absolutely.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes?
LAURA SULLIVAN: So, that's what
-- was one of the most
interesting things about it, is
that a number of NGOs have been
able to build 9,000 permanent
homes at this point.
And we went to one project that
was done by Global Communities
and PCI, where we saw more
than 300 homes being built. In
the project now, they're
building 75 homes that have
running
water for people. And those --
and they say that a lot that is
because they hired
Haitians to do the
bulk of the work.
Some of the sources and
documents that we read show that
the Red Cross had a very
difficult
problem not hiring enough
Haitians, and that they had a
number of expats that were
extremely
expensive and also didn't even
speak either of Haiti's
languages. And one person said,
how can you go to a meeting with
Haitian government officials
when you can't speak the
language?
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
Laura Sullivan of NPR,
thank you so much.
LAURA SULLIVAN: Thank
you for having me.
GWEN IFILL: We have put a link
to the full ProPublica/NPR
report on our home page. That's
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we take a
broader look at China and how
the U.S. should engage with
the rapidly growing economic
and military power.
Today, President Obama discussed
the possibility of China
eventually joining a major trade
deal already in the works with
other Asian nations. He spoke
to public radio's Kai
Ryssdal, host of "Marketplace."
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: They have
already started putting out
feelers
about the possibilities of them
participating at some point.
KAI RYSSDAL,
"Marketplace": To you?
BARACK OBAMA: To us, to Jack
Lew, the treasury secretary.
The fact is that is that if we
have 11 of the leading economies
in the Asia-Pacific
region who have agreed to
enforceable labor standards,
enforceable environmental
standards,
strong I.P. protections,
nondiscrimination against
foreign firms that are
operating,
access to those markets, reduced
tariffs, then China is going to
have to at least take
those international
norms into account.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I recently sat
down with two former treasury
secretaries, Democrat
Robert Rubin and Republican
Henry Paulson. The two, good
friends and longtime colleagues,
reached across the aisle to
co-author a piece about
U.S.-China relations and how to
get
them right.
It appears in this month's
"Atlantic" magazine, and is the
focus of tonight's installment
of our partnership
with "The Atlantic."
China's over 300 mile-an-hour
bullet trains set the world
standard. Chinese shoppers
fill Shanghai streets, and the
skyscrapers continue to rise.
This ancient Asian power
is not only on track to eclipse
the U.S. as the world's largest
economy by 2016. These
days, they're not shy about
flexing their military might, as
they staged their first
ever joint naval exercises in
the Mediterranean with the
Russian navy just last month,
even
building up islands in the South
China Sea to press what it
considers its territorial
claims against Asian neighbors.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: With its actions in
the South China Sea, China
is out of step with both
international norms that
underscore the Asia-Pacific
security
architecture and the regional
consensus in favor of a
non-coercive approach to this
and
other longstanding disputes.
HENRY PAULSON, Former U.S.
Treasury Secretary: China has
emerged as really a formidable
competitor, and as they are
asserting themselves on the
global stage, the longstanding
consensus
that China's rise is good for
the U.S. is beginning to break
down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Henry Paulson
and Bob Rubin worked for
presidents from different
parties,
George W. Bush and Bill Clinton,
but they agree on the need to
chart a midcourse correction
in U.S.-China relations, and
say it needs to happen soon.
What is it about this
U.S.-Chinese relationship that
you think it is so important for
the
American people to
know right now?
ROBERT RUBIN, Former U.S.
Treasury Secretary: That I
think that when you have the two
largest economies in the world,
the United States and China, you
have the opportunity
for a mutually beneficial
bilateral relationship.
And, in addition, if we can get
that right and if we can get a
broad-based understanding
and recognition in each country
that we benefit from the
relation with each other, then I
think we improve the potential
for our working together on
these transnational issues that
so enormously affect each of our
countries, terrorism, Middle
East instability, climate
change, and so much else that
affects the whole of the global
community.
HENRY PAULSON: They're all
going to be easier to solve it
or to deal with if we have got
a good working relationship with
China, and much more difficult
if we don't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I recently met
with the two men at the Council
on Foreign Relations in
New York, where Bob Rubin is now
the co-chairman. In their joint
article, they turn U.S.-China
critiques of each
other on their heads.
Rubin and Paulson argue that
both the United States and China
would be better off if they
accepted, and acted on, the
criticisms leveled by the other
side, this in a relationship
that is increasingly crucial
to global stability.
ROBERT RUBIN: Instead of having
an exchange of grievances -- and
we refer to it as dialogue
of the deaf -- what you will see
is that, if each of our
countries does simply what
is its own self-interest, it
will address the critiques that
the other country is making.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The two are on
board with Chinese claims that
the U.S. needs to ease
its fiscal crisis. And both men
believe other Chinese critiques
are on the mark, like
the need for the U.S. to
invest in infrastructure.
HENRY PAULSON: I think the
biggest challenge is fixing our
own problems. We need a tax
system that's going to let us
raise the revenues we need and
be competitive.
ROBERT RUBIN: We have a paucity
of capital for infrastructure,
and we have a desperate
need for infrastructure. We
should be doing a lot more at
the federal level, and I think
there are ways we could do that
and pay for it that wouldn't
create a fiscal problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In his new book,
Hank Paulson goes even further,
arguing that the U.S. should
welcome Chinese investment more
broadly, holding up Japan as an
example.
HENRY PAULSON: I argue all the
time that the greatest
compliment any country can pay
to the United States of America
is make a direct investment here
that creates jobs.
Back in the days when Bob was my
boss at Goldman Sachs, I
remember very well when the
Japanese
came in and they bought the
Rockefeller Center, and my
mother was horrified, just
horrified.
And I said to her, mom, what
are you concerned about? They
can't put the Rockefeller Center
on an aircraft carrier and take
it back to Japan. We have got
the Rockefeller Center,
and we have got their money.
This is a good thing.
ROBERT RUBIN: Japanese
companies subsequently created a
lot of transplants in this
country,
manufacturing in this country,
manufacturing companies that
hired American workers. And
now there is a lot of enthusiasm
about the Japanese investment in
the United States.
And I think the same thing could
happen with China. I think we
would benefit greatly
from Chinese investment in this
country. And I think we should
be proactively seeking it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But they believe
both countries must make
changes.
HENRY PAULSON: China has an
economic model that has ran out
of steam. It -- they need
a new economic model. Now, it's
very easy to say that. It is
very difficult to reboot
a $10 trillion economy, and
that's what they need to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For a country
with a communist system and a
bureaucratic, state-run economy,
none of the fixes would be easy.
HENRY PAULSON: The most
important parts are opening up
to competition.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They want the
Chinese to stop subsidizing
state-owned companies.
HENRY PAULSON: What they need
to do is rein in the state-owned
sector, to wean them from
their preferential regulatory
treatment, from their subsidies
or energy subsidies, their
interest rate and financing
subsidies, and then open up to
competition.
And that will create opportunity
for private sectors in China and
for U.S. companies to
sell U.S. products and
provide services in China.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lower barriers
to entry for foreign firms, help
expand consumer spending,
rein in cyber-attacks and, once
and for all, protect
intellectual property rights.
ROBERT RUBIN: I heard this when
I was there a few weekends ago,
that they have got to
protect intellectual property
rights effectively if they're
going to provide the incentive
for their own people to pursue
the kind of technological and
life science developments
that they think are so
central to their future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Recently, the
owners of Gucci and Yves Saint
Laurent filed suit against
stock market darling Alibaba,
accusing the Internet retailer
of knowingly selling fake
items. The company spent $160
million in 2014 trying to
prevent the sale of fakes.
If the lawsuit succeeds,
Alibaba could lose far more.
Will these legal actions prompt
the Chinese to stop the
production and sale of
counterfeits?
HENRY PAULSON: I laugh at
people sometimes when they come
to me and say, you know, you
see Chinese President Xi Jinping
frequently. Just tell him this
or that.
It's sort of what I call the
"whisper in the emperor's ear"
phenomena, which, of course,
is not the way China works.
China has a consensus-driven
system. And these changes
are very, very
difficult to make.
And let's think for a minute
what Xi Jinping has inherited.
He's got a broken economic
model. He's got a broken
urbanization model. He's got an
environment that is killing
people. He's got
corruption running rampant.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the
prescriptions Rubin and Paulson
are trying to sell now in the
U.S. are no easier, because they
involve raising taxes, spending
billions on infrastructure,
and encouraging foreign
investment. They're at least as
difficult as anything they did
during their terms as
treasury secretaries.
A lot of people would applaud
and say, that's a great idea,
but getting it done, have you
talked to the congressional
leadership, to the leadership in
the administration about
this?
ROBERT RUBIN: I think it's
probably fair to say both of us
have had a fair bit of
interaction
with the -- with people
in elected office.
And I think we have got to get
to the point where the American
people begin to insist
that those that they elect, no
matter what their views may be,
actually engage in the
process of governance. If you
go back to 1997, Trent Lott and
President Clinton certainly
had very different views on many
issues, but they were able to
come together and agree
on a '97 balanced
budget agreement.
Each of them accepted measures
they didn't like in order to get
an agreement that each
of them felt was far better for
the country and far better from
the perspective that they
looked at policy than no
agreement would have been. And
that is where we have to get
back
to as a political system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, on the
Republican side, Hank Paulson,
we are already in the middle
of a presidential campaign where
the incentive in your party is,
if anything, to move to
the right when it comes to
taxes, when it comes to,
frankly, just dealing with
China.
The image of China has become
much more negative in both
parties, but I think it's fair
to
say in the Republican
Party very strongly.
HENRY PAULSON: All I will say
to those Americans who are
rooting against China, all I can
say
to you is, be careful what you
wish for, because, let me tell
you, air and water knows no
boundaries.
You know, a ton of carbon
emitted from China is every bit
as bad as one from the U.S.
If their economy struggles, our
economic challenges are going to
be greater.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Looking at who
you are, former chairman at
Goldman Sachs, some folks may
look at this and say, wait a
minute, are these solutions
really all about Wall Street and
the American elite, or are they
really about helping the
American working people?
ROBERT RUBIN: I think what we
do have to do is to promote
strong growth that will create
jobs, tighten labor markets,
and increase wages.
Then I think people will have a
better feeling about our
economy, and they will be more
receptive
to those kind of objectives in
terms of trade and technology
that are best for the American
people, best for workers,
and best for consumers.
HENRY PAULSON: I know the
reason that I wrote my book on
China was because it is
important
for my grandchildren and
everyone's grandchildren to grow
up in a world that is prosperous
-- and
I mean inclusively prosperous --
is safe, has got a sound,
healthy environment.
And I think the odds of that are
much, much greater if we're not
in conflict with China,
but if we're working -- working
in complementary ways with
China.
GWEN IFILL: We will be back
with a look at the debate over
development in the Grand
Canyon.
But, first, it's pledge week on
PBS. This break allows your
public television station
to ask for your support. And
that support helps keep programs
like ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
a sacred spot in one of
America's most breathtaking
landmarks. History, environment
and economics all collide, as a
divided Navajo community
grapple with a billion-dollar
plan to develop a pristine spot
where two rivers meet.
Ryan Hill, a reporter at Arizona
State University's Walter
Cronkite School of Journalism,
takes
an in-depth look at
the controversy.
RYAN HILL, Walter Cronkite
School of Journalism and Mass
Communication, Arizona State
University:
The Grand Canyon is one of the
world's most protected places,
for a reason.
WOMAN: It's my time with God.
As you're heading down and the
sun is just starting
to peak out and the shadows are
across these beautiful
creations, it is -- it's
magnificent.
RYAN HILL: Millions come every
year to marvel at one of the
seven Natural Wonders of the
World, which remains unchanged
since the late 1800s, when it
first came under federal
protection.
STEVE EMERICK, Hiker: This is a
pristine -- still, after all
these years, a pristine
outdoors, backcountry
experience. National parks
really were America's best idea,
and
this is a fine example of that.
RYAN HILL: But deep in a remote
corner of the Navajo Nation in
Northern Arizona, there
is a part of the canyon that few
people ever see, the Confluence,
where the Colorado and
the Little Colorado Rivers meet,
a place considered sacred by the
Navajos, who have deep ties
to the land.
DELORES WILSON-AGUIRRE, Save the
Confluence: Two rivers, they
come together. They make
life. That's where life
originated. The emergence,
that's where I people came from.
RYAN HILL: The Confluence
Partners, a group of Arizona
based developers, see something
else: a chance to build, make
money and bring tourists to this
secluded spot. This is
an artist's rendering of the
proposed Escalade, a project
that would include hotels,
restaurants
and an aerial tram that would
take tourists down the canyon to
the Confluence.
The project would be constructed
here on hundreds of acres of
Navajo land on the canyon's
eastern
rim and, with it, a spectacular
view. To Navajo shepherd Marie
Peyketewa and many others,
the project is nothing short of
sacrilegious. She works the
land that has been in her
family for generations.
MARIE PEYKETEWA, Navajo
Shepherd: Look at those walls.
What's going to happen to the
walls of the canyon? They're
going to destroy it. My
grandchildren's kids are not
going
to see this beautiful area.
RYAN HILL: The development
would consume more than land.
It also would consume water,
water that would need to be
piped in for building, drinking
and sanitation. Some fear that
water would come from the
Colorado River and the Grand
Canyon National Park, among
them,
park superintendent
David Uberuaga.
DAVID UBERUAGA, Superintendent,
Grand Canyon National Park: Two
hundred and seventy-seven
miles of the Colorado River go
through Grand Canyon National
Park. It is the water source
for over 30 million people.
Anything that you take away from
that, anything that detracts
that, especially on a permanent
basis, is a degradation that
isn't what we can accept.
RYAN HILL: Five million people
visit the Grand Canyon National
Park every year.
One of them is Jill McCall, who
has been hiking the Grand Canyon
the Grand Canyon for 20 years.
JILL MCCALL, Hiker: To put a
hotel and parking lots and a
tram coming down, it's -- it's
an abomination.
RYAN HILL: It's not only
developers and tourists who
disagree. So do those who live
on tribal lands. But just miles
from the Confluence on the
weathered and impoverished
Western fringes of the Navajo
Nation, Larry Hanks lives
without water, without
electricity.
He supports the project.
LARRY HANKS, Navajo Nation: We
want a better tomorrow for our
kids, because our kids' future
is paramount to us.
RYAN HILL: There are no grocery
stores or parks. Tribal
souvenir stands are as deserted
as the land itself. But the
road to the Escalade project
would bring tourists right
through this part of the
Navajo Reservation.
At this tribal land use meeting,
talk of economic opportunity is
constant. Brian Kensley sees
a tourist influx as a pivotal
moment for his people.
BRIAN KENSLEY, Navajo Tribal
Member: This will give them
another choice for these
visitors
coming worldwide or nationwide
to come in and have a choice to
say, OK, there's still
a tribe that is living and
existing. They are not extinct.
RYAN HILL: The Grand Canyon
National Park superintendent
says he's opposed, even if
it is built on tribal land.
DAVID UBERUAGA: The way the
tram landing is, as proposed,
lands on park lands. So
it's a trespassing into
Grand Canyon National Park.
RYAN HILL: And this land is
valued by everyone, those who
see it as a chance to thrive.
LARRY HANKS: We're trying to
fight so we can have a little
bit slighter, higher quality
of the life. My dream for my
daughter is, I want something
for her around here, because
this is home to her.
RYAN HILL: And those wanting to
protect it for future
generations.
DELORES WILSON-AGUIRRE: When
you have a tie to the land,
especially here at our place
of emergence, it's not worth
giving it up for money.
MAN: My children and your
children, they wouldn't see
wilderness here in what is
really
one of the most spectacular
places on earth.
RYAN HILL: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Ryan Hill in
Grand Canyon National Park.
GWEN IFILL: The recently
inaugurated Navajo president,
Russell Begaye, at first signed
a deal supporting the project,
but now he says he is opposed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the
"NewsHour" online: Scientists
are trying to understand a
gigantic
cloud of methane that hovers
over the Four Corners region of
the U.S. Southwest. It
is believed to comprise nearly
10 percent of all methane
emissions derived from natural
gas in the country, but its
origins remain a mystery. Our
data team has compiled a
report, and you can find that on
our home page. That's at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: On Thursday, Miles
O'Brien kicks off a four-part
series, Cracking Ebola's Code.
Hari Sreenivasan
gives us a preview.
HARI SREENIVASAN: More than
26,000 dead, people still
falling sick. Miles O'Brien
journeys through West Africa,
animals, disease trackers, virus
hunters looking to stop the
next big outbreak, possibly with
a vaccine, fear and surprising
hope -- the next chapter
in the fight against Ebola
Thursday on the "NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online, and
again here tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and good night.